---
title: 10. Boolean Formulas
author: Eric Blais
layout: post
---

Boolean circuits are not the only natural and interesting non-uniform model of computation.
Another particularly important class of such models of computation is obtained by considering 
a slight variant.


## Definitions

A _Boolean formula_ is a Boolean circuit with one important additional restriction: all of the gates have only _one_ output wire.

The diagram of a Boolean formula looks like a tree:

(...)

Equivalently, and more commonly, a Boolean formula can be described as an expression with variables $$x_1,\ldots,x_n$$ and operators $$\neg$$, $$\wedge$$, and $$\vee$$.
This definition provides a different way to represent formula circuits.
The example above, for instance, can also be represented as the expression:

(...)

The _size_ of a formula is defined as for circuits: it is the number of $$\wedge$$ and $$\vee$$ gates that it contains, excluding the output gate.
The _formula complexity_ of a Boolean function $$f \colon \{0,1\}^n \to \{0,1\}$$ is the minimum size of any formula that computes the function $$f$$.


## DNF and CNF Formulas

One particularly important class of formulas is the set of _DNF formulas_, which stands for formulas in _Disjunctive Normal Form_.
A DNF formula is a formula which contains some number of $$\wedge$$ gates connected to subsets of the input bits or their negations, and a single $$\vee$$ gate that takes as input the outputs of each $$\wedge$$ gate.
Each $$\wedge$$ gate represents a _term_ in the DNF formula.

Looking back at our proof of the universality of Boolean circuits, we see that the proof in fact constructs DNF formulas for the functions.
Therefore, we obtain the following universal bound.

> **Theorem 1.** 
> For every function $$f \colon \{0,1\}^n \to \{0,1\}$$, there exists a DNF formula $$F$$ of size at most $$2^n$$.
{: .block-danger}

The _width_ of a DNF formula is the maximum number of inputs in any of its terms.
Without loss of generality, every DNF formula has width at most $$n$$.
The _DNF width complexity_ of a Boolean function is the minimum width of any DNF formula that computes it.
There are Boolean functions whose DNF size and width complexities are both large.

> **Theorem 2.**
> Every DNF formula that computes the parity function $$\oplus_n \colon \{0,1\}^n \to \{0,1\}$$ has width $$n$$ and size at least $$2^{n-1}$$.
{: .block-danger}

> **Proof.**
> Assume on the contrary that there is a DNF formula $$F$$ with a term of width at most $$n-1$$ that computes the parity function $$\oplus_n$$.
> This means that there must be a variable $$x_i$$ missing from this term.
> But then any assignment that satisfies this term still satisfies it when we flip the value of $$x_i$$, and so the formula has value 1 on both these inputs.
> However, $$\oplus_n$$ always changes value when we flip exactly one of the input bits, so we obtain a contradiction on the claim that the DNF formula $$F$$ computes $$\oplus_n$$.
> 
> The argument above shows that every term in a DNF formula $$F$$ that computes $$\oplus_n$$ must have width $$n$$ and, therefore, must be satisfied by exactly 1 input.
> There are $$2^{n}/2$$ inputs for which $$\oplus_n$$ takes the value 1, so there must be at least as many terms in $$F$$.

Another important class of formulas is the class of _CNF formulas_ (which stands for _Conjunctive Normal Form_) that we obtain when we exchange the roles of the $$\wedge$$ and $$\vee$$ gates in the definition of DNF formulas.
Namely, a CNF formula contains a number of $$\vee$$ gates connected to subsets of the input bits or their negations.
Each of these $$\vee$$ gates represents a _clause_ of the CNF formula, and the output of the formula is obtained by taking the $$\wedge$$ of each clause.

The same arguments as above can be used to show that every Boolean function on $$n$$ bits can be computed by a CNF formula of size $$2^n+1$$ and that this bound is asymptotically tight for the parity function $$\oplus_n$$.


## Cook-Levin Theorem

CNF formulas appear naturally in the study of $$\mathbf{NP}$$-completeness via the $$\textsf{SAT}$$ problem defined by

$$
\textsf{SAT} = \{ \left< F \right> : F \mbox{ is a satisfiable CNF formula}\}
$$

and its variant

$$
\textsf{3SAT} = \{ \left< F \right> : F \mbox{ is a satisfiable CNF formula of width } \le 3\}.
$$

The celebrated Cook-Levin Theorem shows that $$\textsf{SAT}$$ and $$\textsf{3SAT}$$ are $$\mathbf{NP}$$-complete.
We can obtain this result from the $$\mathbf{NP}$$-completeness of $$\textsf{CircuitSAT}$$.

> **Cook-Levin Theorem.**
> $$\textsf{3SAT}$$ are $$\mathbf{NP}$$-complete.
{: .block-danger}

> **Proof.**
> The languages $$\textsf{3SAT}$$ is in $$\mathbf{NP}$$ because we can easily verify in polynomial time whether a given assignment $$x$$ satisfies a formula $$F$$ given the encoding of $$F$$.
> 
> We now want to prove that $$\textsf{3SAT}$$ is $$\mathbf{NP}$$-hard.
> We have already shown that $$\textsf{CircuitSAT}$$ is $$\mathbf{NP}$$-hard, so it suffices to show that $$\textsf{CircuitSAT} \le_{\mathbf{P}} \textsf{3SAT}$$.
> For any Boolean circuit $$C$$, we want to construct in polynomial time a CNF formula that is satisfiable if and only if the circuit $$C$$ is satisfiable.
> To do this, the formula $$F$$ that we construct will have one variable for each of the $$n$$ inputs to $$C$$ as well as one variable $$x_g$$ for each gate $$g$$ of $$C$$.
> We want to construct constraints that are satisfied if and only if the variables for the gates are assigned the correct value given the circuit's inputs.
> We can do this directly for the three types of gates.
> 
> A negation gate is simple.
> Let $$x_a$$ be the input to the negation gate associated to $$x_g$$. 
> Then the two constraints
> 
> $$
> (x_g \vee x_a) \wedge (\overline{x_g} \vee \overline{x_a})
> $$
> 
> are both satisfied if and only if $$x_g = \neg x_a$$.
> 
> When $$x_g$$ is the variable associated to the $$\wedge$$ gate $$g$$ that takes as inputs $$x_a,x_b,\ldots,x_z$$ then the constraints
> 
> $$
> (x_g \vee \overline{x_a} \vee \overline{x_b} \vee \cdots \vee \overline{x_z})
> \wedge
> (\overline{x_g} \vee x_a) \wedge (\overline{x_g} \vee x_b) \wedge \cdots \wedge (\overline{x_g} \vee x_z)
> $$
> 
> are all satisfied if and only if $$x_g = x_a \wedge x_b \wedge \cdots \wedge x_z$$.
> 
> Finally, when $$x_g$$ represents the $$\vee$$ gate with inputs $$x_a,\ldots,x_z$$ then
> 
> $$
> (\overline{x_g} \vee x_a \vee x_b \vee \cdots \vee x_z)
> \wedge
> (x_g \vee \overline{x_a}) \wedge (x_g \vee \overline{x_b}) \wedge \cdots \wedge (x_g \vee \overline{x_z})
> $$
> 
> are all satisfied if and only i f $$x_g = x_a \vee x_b \vee \cdots \vee x_z$$.
> 
> Combining the constraints for all the gates in $$C$$ and adding one additional constraint that consists simply of the variable for the ouput gate of $$C$$ gives us the final formula $$F$$.
> This formula is in CNF form and each of its clauses have width at most $$3$$.
> Its encoding can be constructed in polynomial time given the encoding of $$C$$.
> And $$F$$ is satisfiable if and only if $$C$$ is satisfiable, giving us the desired polynomial-time reduction from $$\textsf{CircuitSAT}$$ to $$\textsf{3SAT}$$.




---

_Eric Blais &copy;2024 &mdash; Last edited on Jan. 4, 2024_
